Planet earth took on its present form slowly. Some
225 million years ago, a single supercontinent contained
all the world’s dry land. Then enormous
chunks of terrain began to drift away from this
colossal continent, opening the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans, narrowing the Pacific Ocean, and forming
the great landmasses of Eurasia, Africa, Australia,
Antarctica, and the Americas. The existence of a single
original continent has been proved in part by the
discovery of nearly identical species of fish that
swim today in the long-separated freshwater lakes
of the various continents.
Continued shifting and folding of the earth’s
crust thrust up mountain ranges. The Appalachians
were probably formed even before continental separation,
perhaps 350 million years ago. The majestic
ranges of western North America—the Rockies, the
Sierra Nevada, the Cascades, and the Coast Ranges—
arose much more recently, geologically speaking,
some 135 million to 25 million years ago. They are
truly “American” mountains, born after the continent
took on its own separate geological identity.
By about 10 million years ago, nature had
sculpted the basic geological shape of North America.
The continent was anchored in its northeastern
corner by the massive Canadian Shield—a zone
undergirded by ancient rock, probably the first part
of what became the North American landmass to
have emerged above sea level. A narrow eastern
coastal plain, or “tidewater” region, creased by
many river valleys, sloped gently upward to the
timeworn ridges of the Appalachians. Those ancient
mountains slanted away on their western side into
the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward
to the Mississippi Valley bottom and then rose
relentlessly to the towering peaks of the Rockies.
From the Rocky Mountain crest—the “roof of America”—the
land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain
Great Basin, bounded by the Rockies on the
east and the Sierra and Cascade ranges on the west.
The valleys of the Sacramento and San Joaquin
Rivers and the Willamette–Puget Sound trough
seamed the interiors of present-day California, Oregon,
and Washington. The land at last met the foaming
Pacific, where the Coast Ranges rose steeply
from the sea.
Nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain
in the Great Ice Age, beginning about 2 million
years ago. Two-mile-thick ice sheets crept from the
polar regions to blanket parts of Europe, Asia, and
the Americas. In North America the great glaciers
carpeted most of present-day Canada and the
United States as far southward as a line stretching
from Pennsylvania through the Ohio country and
the Dakotas to the Pacific Northwest.
When the glaciers finally retreated about 10,000
years ago, they left the North American landscape
transformed, and much as we know it today. The
weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed
the level of the Canadian Shield. The grinding and
flushing action of the moving and melting ice had
scoured away the shield’s topsoil, pitting its rocky
surface with thousands of shallow depressions into
which the melting glaciers flowed to form lakes. The
same glacial action scooped out and filled the Great
Lakes. They originally drained southward through
the Mississippi River system to the Gulf of Mexico.
When the melting ice unblocked the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, the lake water sought the St. Lawrence
River outlet to the Atlantic Ocean, lowering the
Great Lakes’ level and leaving the MissouriMississippi-Ohio
system to drain the enormous
midcontinental basin between the Appalachians
and the Rockies. Similarly, in the west, water from
the melting glaciers filled sprawling Lake Bonneville,
covering much of present-day Utah,
Nevada, and Idaho. It drained to the Pacific Ocean
through the Snake and Columbia River systems
until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap
lowered the water level, cutting off access to the
Snake River outlet. Deprived of both inflow and
drainage, the giant lake became a gradually shrinking
inland sea. It grew increasingly saline, slowly
evaporated, and left an arid, mineral-rich desert.
Only Great Salt Lake remained as a relic of Bonneville’s
former vastness. Today Lake Bonneville’s
ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to
1,000 feet above the dry floor of the Great Basin.
